# **Project Two**

## **Project Title: Customer Segmentation for a Subscription Service**

### **Introduction**
---
In this project, the customer segmentation for a subscription service is analysed. However, before the analysis, the customer segmentation dataset was subjected to data cleaning and preparation to ensure no missing or incorrect values in critical columns like subscription type and dates, revenue, and canceled. 


### **Objectives**
---
The goal of this analysis is to explore sales data to uncover key insights such as top-selling products, regional performance, and monthly sales trends.

### **Data Sources**
---
The main data source for this analysis is customerdata.xls, titled LITA Capstone Sales Data, provided by the Incubator as part of the assessment for the LITA training program I completed.


### **Tools Used**
---
The customer segmentation data was analysed using three major analysis tools which are:
- Microsoft Excel [Download Here] (https://www.microsoft.com)
   1. For Data Cleaning
   2. For Analysis
- SQL (Structured Query Language) was used to write queries that further extract insights from the customer segmentation for subscription service data; and
- Power BI
   1. Is used to create an interesting story-telling dashboard that presents the outcomes of the analysis. 


### **Data Cleaning and Preparation**
---
In the initial phase of cleaning and preparation of the data, the following steps are taken after the loading of the data:
- The data type is checked to ensure they are correctly formatted. 
- Missing values or variables are checked to detect their presence in the data.
- Duplicate values were checked and removed from the data while in the Excel environment to obtain unique entries in the dataset to attain the right information from the provided data.


### **Exploratory Data Analysis**
---
Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) is an approach for analyzing datasets to summarize their main characteristics, often with visual techniques. This process typically involves using summary statistics (such as mean, median, and standard deviation) and visualizations (like histograms, scatter plots, and box plots) to thoroughly examine the data. In this project, pivot table summaries are used to identify data types, missing values, outliers, and errors. This approach also provides insights into customer segmentation and behaviour, helping uncover key patterns in subscription service usage.
hence, the following questions are answered about the data:
- What are the subscription patterns of customers based on region, month, and year?
- What is the average subscription duration?
- Which are the most popular subscription types?
- How many customers are there from each region?
- What is the most popular subscription type by the number of customers?
- Which customers canceled their subscriptions within 6 months?
- What is the average subscription duration for all customers?
- Who are the customers with subscriptions longer than 12 months?
- What is the total revenue generated by each subscription type?
- Which are the top 3 regions by subscription cancellations?
- What is the total number of active and canceled subscriptions?



### **Data Analysis**
---
In this section, queries written to extract key insights into about the data are presented:
```SQL
Create database LITA_Project2

select * from [dbo].[LITAProject2]

------- Total number of customers from each region -------
select Count(CustomerID) as [Number of Customers], 
	Region from [dbo].[LITAProject2]
Group by Region
	Order by [Number of Customers] Desc;

Create database LITA_Project2

select * from [dbo].[LITAProject2]

------- Total number of customers from each region -------
select Count(CustomerID) as [Number of Customers], 
	Region from [dbo].[LITAProject2]
Group by Region
	Order by [Number of Customers] Desc;



------ Most popular subscription type by the number of customers ------
Select Top 1
    SubscriptionType,
    Count(CustomerID) as [Number of Customer Subscribed]
From 
    [dbo].[LITAProject2]
Group by 
    SubscriptionType
Order by 
    SubscriptionType Desc;



---- Customers who canceled their subscription within 6 months ----------
Select CustomerID, CustomerName, SubscriptionStart, SubscriptionEnd
From [dbo].[LITAProject2]
where Canceled = 1
and DateDiff(Month, SubscriptionStart, SubscriptionEnd) <= 6;



------- Average subscription duration for all customers ------
Select
	AVG(SubsDuration) as [Average of Subscription Duration] 
	from [dbo].[LITAProject2]
		


----------- Customers with subscriptions longer than 12 months ---------
Select CustomerID, CustomerName, SubscriptionStart, SubscriptionEnd
From [dbo].[LITAProject2]
where 
	DateDiff(Month, SubscriptionStart, SubscriptionEnd) >12;



--------- Total revenue by subscription type ----------
select Sum(Revenue) as [Total Revenue by Subscription Type], 
	SubscriptionType from [dbo].[LITAProject2]
Group by SubscriptionType
	Order by [Total Revenue by Subscription Type] Desc;



--------- Top 3 regions by subscription cancellations----------
Select Top 3
    Region,
    count(Canceled) as [Top Subscription Cancellations]
From 
    [dbo].[LITAProject2]
	Where Canceled = 1
Group by 
    Region
Order by 
    [Top Subscription Cancellations] Desc;


------ Total number of active and canceled subscriptions---------
Select 
    Canceled,
    Count(*) as [Subscription Count]
From [dbo].[LITAProject2]
Group by Canceled;

Select 
    Case 
        when Canceled = 0 Then 'Active' 
        when Canceled = 1 Then 'Canceled' 
    end as SubscriptionStatus,
    count (*) as [Subscription Count]
From 
	[dbo].[LITAProject2]
Group by Canceled;
```

```Excel
Number of Canceled Customers=COUNTIF(G2:G33788,"TRUE")
Total Number of Customers==COUNTIF(B2:B33788,"*")
Churn Rate=
Average Subscription Day=AVERAGE(I2:I33788)
```



the results of the analysis of the customer data are presented. The analysis was done using Pivot tables which were used to summarize total sales by product, region, month and other interesting reports were also created. Excel formulas were also used to calculate metrics such as average sales per product and total revenue by region, and other interesting key insights are also presented. Additionally, queries were written to attain additional insights about the data using SQL and Power BI was used to produce an interactive dashboard that highlights the findings of the analysis.



#### *A. Revenue Distribution by Region*
Here, the focus of the analysis is on comparing revenue contributions and identifying trends. The report provides a detailed analysis of the revenue generated by four geographical regions: East, South, West, and North, showing the revenue contribution from each region and highlighting the overall performance based on the total revenue of 67,540,175.00. 


